docs: validation-and-proving-mechanisms (#2145)
OffchainLabs/arbitrum-docs: arbitrum-docs/how-arbitrum-works/05-validation-and-proving/02-rollup-protocol.mdx

---
title: Rollup Protocol and Validation
description: 'Learn the fundamentals of the Arbitrum Rollup Protocol and validation.'
author: pete-vielhaber
sme: Mehdi
user_story: As a current or prospective Arbitrum user, I need to learn more about the Rollup protocol and validation.
content_type: get-started
---

import ImageZoom from '@site/src/components/ImageZoom';

<a data-quicklook-from="arbitrum">Arbitrum</a> operates as an Optimistic Rollup, which advances the chain's
state based on <a data-quicklook-from="transaction">transaction</a> assertions unless a dispute arises.
This approach enables scalability, lower costs, and high throughput while maintaining security through
Ethereum's <a data-quicklook-from="trustless">trustless</a> validation model.

> Optimistic Rollups work by separating execution from proving to ensure efficient transaction processing without immediate validation. The execution process is covered in detail in the [State Transition Function](/how-arbitrum-works/04-state-transition-function/01-stf-gentle-intro.mdx). This section focuses on validation and proving mechanisms. We will cover how Arbitrum validators confirm the chain's state and how assertions are posted to Ethereum for finalization, with the potential for future challenges if an <a data-quicklook-from="assertion">assertion</a> is determined to be incorrect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Optimistic Rollups work by separating execution from proving to ensure efficient transaction processing without immediate validation. The execution process is covered in detail in the [State Transition Function](/how-arbitrum-works/04-state-transition-function/01-stf-gentle-intro.mdx). This section focuses on validation and proving mechanisms. We will cover how child chain validators confirm the chain's state and how assertions are posted to parent chain for finalization, with the potential for future challenges if an <a data-quicklook-from="assertion">assertion</a> is determined to be incorrect.
```

## Execution vs. proving: Separating responsibilities

A fundamental design choice in Arbitrum is the separation of execution from proving, which allows for:

> - **Efficient execution**: Transactions are processed optimistically without immediate verification.

Author: will do!

- **Deterministic proving**: If challenged, state transitions are replayable and verified onchain.

To achieve this, Arbitrum compiles the <a data-quicklook-from="state-transition-function">State Transition Function</a> (STF) into different formats:

- **Execution mode**: Uses Go's native compiler for high-performance execution on <a data-quicklook-from="validator">validator</a> nodes.

- **Proving mode**: Compiles to WebAssembly (<a data-quicklook-from="wasm">WASM</a>), which transforms into WebAssembly for Arbitrum Virtual Machine (WAVM) for fraud-proof verification.

> This dual compilation approach ensures that Arbitrum nodes execute transactions efficiently while allowing deterministic trustless verification on Ethereum.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This dual compilation approach ensures that Arbitrum nodes execute transactions efficiently while allowing deterministic trustless verification on parent chain.
```
